Okay, so we've learned how to create
an app, we've attached some reactive data.
That was fun, hopefully,
pretty easy to do.
And now, of course, we wanna talk about
how we deal with user input, right,
cuz that's what a lot of
JavaScripts value is.
It's handling the interactivity
of your website.
So the first thing we wanna talk about is
let's open Playground actually in Chrome,
so we have that.
So let me just open a new tab with this,
and
this will be Playground.
Okay, so for
the sake of Playground demo purposes,
let's just use the standard
example of the Counter app, right?
Which is the fact that if we go inside
of here, and this time, I'll see,
let's do that sequentially.
So I'll put a horizontal line here,
line break, there we go.
And then here we'll just do an h1,
we'll call it Counter.
We have a count, and then we have a
button, where we want to increment count.
This should look pretty familiar, 10.
Okay, so if you scroll down,
I don't like the fact that this
is all the way at the bottom.
I'm gonna actually move
this up to the top.
Copy that, and hr, great, so
we'll do this from most recent to oldest.
Okay, so here we have our counter and
your question is probably thinking,
okay, how do we actually change data?
Because after all, it's fun to render some
reactive stuff, we wanna do more with it.
So inside of Vue,
we have our data here, but
the question is we wanna
actually change it.
And so the option that we wanna learn
about next is the concept of methods.
And so if we think about functions
in JavaScript, right, typically,
we would have something
like let count = 0.
And then you'd have a function
called increment, and
it would say count ++,
something along these lines.
When you think of methods,
think of it as functions from
JavaScript that are available for
your app to call it anytime,
that's the best way to think about it.
So from this perspective, we would
actually want to then define a method,
we'll just say incrementCount.
And inside of here,
this is where a question that
we had earlier comes into play.
So when you wanna refer to something
else in the app, so in this case,
we wanna actually refer to this
count property inside of data.
Vue is smart about a lot of things,
but if we just currently say,
count++, this is not gonna work.
And the reason for that is because if we
know as when it comes to JavaScript in
programming, scoping is a thing.
So it doesn't know basically where
to fetch count from, and so this
is where the dreaded keyword of this comes
into play when it comes to JavaScript.
That this keyword is where Vue basically
takes the context of the app, and
it will basically figure
out where count exists.
So from Vue 2, you might have noticed
it from like this.data.count,
this would be an explicit
thing you might do.
But because Vue knows that oftentimes
we're referring to data or
computed unless you have some
really clear name clashes,
you can just use this.whatever
property you're looking for.
And that goes for basically anything
you're defining within this Options API.
And the benefit of this is that while
some people find that this keyword is
confusing, the point of it, I think at
the time when the API has been designed is
around the fact that you shouldn't really
have to think about what this even means.
The point is I think of this as the app,
and that will you come in and
you've referred to this app,
and that's it.
So when I was teaching other
people Vue for the first time,
even though they didn't have
a lot of JavaScript experience,
they got the convention that as long
as I call this, it refers to my app.
And I'm not gonna learn about scoping or
anything, it just works, and
that in itself is an advantage
from a learning perspective.
But just know that you don't have
to use this so that in the future,
if people are actively avoiding it,
we can go ahead and
do that once we learn
about composition API.
But while we're in
the Options API right now,
this is how we actually refer to things
within this configuration object.
Okay, so now that we have the this
count++, what we're gonna do here now is
we're gonna go set how do
we actually call the thing?
And so what we're gonna do is
we're gonna just like before,
we're gonna use a Vue directive
to actually call the thing.
And so we're gonna use v-on,
that is the directive that
you'll want to learn for this.
Because similar to what you know
from JavaScript events, onclick,
onkeyup, this is the same idea,
we're extending on that theory.
And so instead of just like onclick
though, which you might think that's what
I'm probably gonna guess,
because Vue on itself is the directive,
you have the ability to pass it
an argument through the colon symbol.
So it's v-on: the event that you
wanna call, and the event you wanna,
again, is standard JavaScript events.
We haven't made anything up, so
key up anything that you can think of
that's standard in
the JavaScript API that exists.
And so when you click,
what do we wanna refer to?
Well, guess what,
we wanna refer to our incrementCount
function that we had earlier.
The key thing here to remember though
is that you don't want to actually call
the function,
because this is something that will be
called when the event is triggered.
So basically, you're passing a reference
to the function inside of your app.
And then when it's clicked,
it will be called,
that's the reason why you
don't call it immediately.
So if we save that, and
let's go ahead and now refresh our page.
You can see, boom, things are actually
changing and they're being tracked.
So that's fairly straightforward.
What about something a little bit more
complicated like what if I wanted to set
the amount that the counter
is being incremented by?
Okay, well, in this case, you're gonna
say, well, let's say we have a label here,
let's say incrementAmount and
then it'll be increment by.
And then you probably have some
elements here, that's a number.
And then so if we refresh this,
theoretically, what you would want is
the ability to change the amount
that increment count is changing.
So how would we actually do that?
Well, first of all, what we wanna do
is we need a reactive data property,
cuz we wanna track what
the heck is going on.
So at this moment, if we go down
into our data, we have this count.
And we can say,
we can just have incrementAmount,
a reactive data property and
currently, it's 1.
And then what we wanna do then is tie it
into our incrementCount down here, so
let me actually collapse this.
And so rather than just incrementing
it by 1, which is the ++,
we'll do += this.incrementAmount.
Oops, incrementAmount, save.
And to show that this is working,
I'm gonna switch this over to 10, and
we're gonna go ahead and refresh this.
And you can see,
it's jumping as you would expect by 10.
But we want to be able to change this,
right?
How do we actually basically
connect these two?
So let me go ahead and actually wrap
this part in the div real quick.
Oops, that's not what I wanted at all.
[SOUND] div, there we go, okay,
that should give it a new line, perfect.
Okay, so
the first thing first is we need our input
to display what it is that value is.
So how we do that?
Normally, we would say value equals 10,
this is standard HTML.
But this is static, right,
this is something we define ourselves,
has nothing to do with our app.
How do we connect the two?
The way we do that is with another Vue
directive, because what are we doing,
we're now extending upon our HTML
to give it super power to do what?
To have some interactivity,
to be supercharged with reactive data.
And so you do that via v-bind, right?
You're binding the value
to a dynamic property,
that's the way to think about it.
But here though,
what are we binding it to?
We're not binding it to 10,
that's not what we're binding by.
We're binding it to incrementAmount.
So we can refer directly to the variable
that we talked about earlier.
And so to show that this change,
this time,
I'm gonna change incrementAmount to 8,
and if I refresh, boom, there we go.
We can see that they're
now talking to each other.
And so now, we can see when we
increment count, this is great.
It's actually changing, but
what do we know about this?
We know that if we change now to 12,
is it gonna make a difference?
No, it's not, in fact,
it's gonna reset itself back to 8.
What's going on?
Well, the reason for this is because
you've told Vue, track this thing and
make sure that its value is always
bound to this incrementAmount,
that's what you've told it.
And so this is why even though
we've changed it once, and
we try to increment the count,
it's setting it back,
because Vue is doing it's
job that you told it to do.
So what do we wanna do?
We want to actually update incrementAmount
whenever someone actually types inside of
the input element.
Then.
So how might you do that?
Well, we're gonna actually
listen to an event.
And so what is that?
We learned it is v-on, and
we're gonna listen to the input event.
And what we're not gonna do though is
we're not gonna inline the function that
will change this,
because I find that to be very clunky.
So we're gonna call it
changeIncrementAmount.
And so what we're doing here is we're
saying, hey, on the input event for
this input element, when we get an input
event, I want you to run this function,
which we had not created yet to be clear.
So come in here, and
we'll go to the method and
we'll say changeIncrementAmount
just like that.
And here's the difference though.
Now that you're actually
listening to an event,
you actually get a default event
object that's passed to you once
again just like you would expect
from standard JavaScript.
So I'm gonna call that event, and we're
gonna do as though we're just gonna log
the event to prove that this is working.
So I'm gonna go ahead and
open this up, refresh.
And if I go ahead and type in here or
anything happening, look,
the input event is being fired.
So what do we know?
Well, we know, again,
we won't dive into the details of it, but
event.target.value is
what you're looking for.
That's usually the convention for
when you're playing with form elements.
So to show you this works,
if I delete this,
you can see it's actually showing up
inside of my terminal as you would expect.
And so now that we're actually getting
the dynamic value of the event,
we can then say,
this.incrementAmount = event.target.value.
Now, to show that this works,
I'm a big fan of making sure things
are actually working correctly.
So I'm gonna go ahead and inside of here,
we're just gonna add a quick h1 for
the incrementAmount.
So you can see here, we're rendering
the incrementAmount here and here.
And if I change this now to 18, you'll
see that it is being tracked correctly.
It's in here, and
now we can increment the count, and
then that's not working correctly.
Anybody have a guess why?
>> String.
>> it's a string, that's right.
So you might think, okay, well, you know
what I'm gonna do, I'm gonna come in here.
I'm gonna wrap this in a number,
be done with it.
All right, let's refresh this
to make sure that works.
Let's do 80 this time, all right,
that works, but I'll do you one better.
Instead of having to come in here and
do it here, which is kind of silly because
the incrementAmount,
it already has a target value.
And what's a bit odd too is that
if we look at our input element,
we are already type number.
Why is that the case?
Well, this is one way to fix it,
here's the thing though.
If we take a look at our inputs,
Sam had made the joke that I showed in
the tweet earlier that most of
the web is rendering a list.
Well, I'd say a lot of the web is
also filling out forms, right?
I mean, that's what a lot of our bread and
butter is too.
So Vue was like, okay,
this is a lot of work to do every single
time you have a form element, right?
Gosh, what if we could just
learn from what Angular did and
do two-way binding in
this particular contexts?
[LAUGH] So instead of having to
always define, and change, and
track all this stuff, what if we
had a directive called v-model and
we tracked it directly to the data
property that we cared about?
Once you have this v-model,
all of this I say disappears, but
v-model is syntactic sugar for basically
configuring all that underneath the hood.
Which means that inside
of our method down here,
we don't even need this as well,
so I can save that.
Now, if we refresh, once again,
let's do 800 this time and increment.
You'll see that things are changing
just as you'd expect with this v-model.
And what's even more interesting if
you'll notice, it's not a string anymore.
Because once again, what Vue tries to do
is it looks at the developer experience
and it goes, hey, I know that
I'm looking at an input element.
Because here's the thing, V-model works
with other form elements like checkboxes,
radio, select, you can do all that.
But it also knows what kind
of input event to listen for,
cuz you'll know that especially with
select, that one's a tricky one.
I always have to look at the docs
every time I work with select,
I have to code it from scratch.
But here, it actually knows that
we are type number in here.
And because of that,
the value it's actually tracking inside of
its app has automatically been converted.
Now, if we did string for
example here or non string text revert,
you can see, it's actually smart
enough to know what to do.
But [COUGH] the one thing I wanted
to show because this used to be
a Vue 2 thing is that you could
actually attach arguments or
basically modifiers to your directives.
So in this case,
it's a V-model of number for example, but
there'll be other opportunities
I get to present that later on.